Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking about
something that millions of people
have strong opinions about, yet
surprisingly few could explain clearly.
British politics.
We’ll talk about how the British political
system works, where it comes from, why
it looks the way it does, and some of
the quirky features that make it very
different to politics in other countries.
From how voting works to why this
means British politics has historically
been dominated by two parties, as
well as where Scotland and Wales
all fit in, I’m going to try to make
it all make a little more sense.
And perhaps oddly enough, in an episode
about politics, I am going to make
this as apolitical as possible, so
this isn’t about saying one party is
good and another is bad, but rather
explaining how the entire system works.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
If you asked someone from outside
the UK to describe British politics,
you might hear something like this:
“There’s a Prime Minister… and a King… and
Lords…and something called Westminster…
and people shouting at each other across
an old room that looks far too small…
and Scotland wants independence… and then
there was Brexit…and there seems to be a
new Prime Minister every five minutes.”
And to be fair, that’s not an
entirely inaccurate summary.
British politics is unusual.
It’s old, it’s full of quirky
traditions, and it’s based far
more on customs and conventions
than on a single written rulebook.
So over the next 20 minutes or so, I
will try to explain how it works, so
the next time you hear about an MP
or the Commons or devolution, well,
it might just be a little clearer.
The first thing to talk about is a little
history, as there are two key events
that shaped the modern political system.
The first was all the way back in 1215,
when the then King John I was forced by
a group of powerful English barons to
sign a document called the Magna Carta.
What this did was establish the
principle that the king [or queen] was
not above the law, that the monarch
couldn’t just do whatever they wanted.
I mean, they were still the most
powerful person in the country,
but it was the first time there
were limits placed on this power.
Fifty years later, in 1265, the
first “semi-modern” parliament was
called, when an English Earl called
for representatives from counties, or
districts, up and down the country, to
come to the Palace of Westminster to
discuss the management of the country.
And this, more than 760 years ago,
was the basis for the political
system that still exists today.
It has evolved significantly since
then, with power shifting steadily
from the monarch to Parliament, through
civil wars, reforms, and revolutions.
But today the country still has a
monarch, there is still a parliament,
which meets at Westminster, and
is formed of representatives
from up and down the country.
So, let’s talk about Westminster,
where it all began, and the tiny
area of the country that is still,
for better or for worse, the
centre of British political power.
If you have been to London, you
will probably have seen the British
Parliament; it’s in the Palace of
Westminster, beside the River Thames.
It’s the big building with Big
Ben, the clock tower, at one end.
Inside, parliament has two
what's called chambers.
The first is The House of Commons.
And here “common” is short for
commoner, just meaning a normal,
non-titled or royal person.
This is the heart of British
politics, and where the 650 elected
Members of Parliament, or MPs, sit.
The other chamber is called the House
of Lords, which has around 800 members.
Importantly, these Lords are not
elected by the public; they can
only be appointed by the monarch–the
king or queen–but they are typically
proposed by the Prime Minister.
Historically they were chosen because they
were Lords, your father was a lord, so
you would inherit his title after he died.
This, clearly, was not a very
democratic system, so it was reformed,
and the number of what’s called
hereditary peers was greatly reduced.
Most members are now life peers, so
people appointed for their expertise
or their long public service, and
importantly appointed for life; that’s
why there isn’t a fixed number of them.
They might be former politicians,
scientists, lawyers, businesspeople,
campaigners, or academics.
Unlike hereditary peers, they cannot pass
their title on to their children, and they
usually serve until retirement or death.
So although the House of Lords still
sounds aristocratic, and it’s clearly
less democratic than the Commons,
the modern version is more like a
chamber of appointed specialists.
And the business of governing the country
is split between these two houses: the
House of Commons and the House of Lords.
Typically the House of Commons will
propose new laws, and it’s the House of
Lords job to review and approve them.
But crucially, it cannot block
legislation indefinitely, forever.
If the elected House of Commons
insists, its decision ultimately wins.
And then there is a third part of
this political system, and that’s the
monarch, the sitting king or queen.
To an outsider, it might look like
the monarch’s job is just to turn
up in fancy clothes and a crown, and
there is an element of truth to that.
But the monarch still technically
appoints the Prime Minister, opens
Parliament, dissolves Parliament,
meets the Prime Minister every week to
discuss the state of the country, and
gives the final say on any new laws.
But, and this is an important but, the
monarch will never go against Parliament.
To do so would be suicidal for the
monarchy, and it has been more than
three centuries since a British monarch
went against an act of parliament.
So it is essentially ceremonial, although
officially the monarch could say no.
Supporters of this monarchical system
argue that it provides stability,
continuity, and a sense of national
identity that’s above party politics.
Critics say it's outdated and
fundamentally undemocratic to have
a king or queen that is in any way
involved in the political system.
Whatever your view, the practical
reality is straightforward: The
real political power in the UK lies
with Parliament and the elected
government, not with the crown.
The monarch is the constitutional
figurehead, the symbolic centre of the
system, but not the one making decisions.
They reign but not rule,
so the expression goes.
So, who does rule?
Well, the government.
And here, we must talk about how
the British voting system works,
how a party gains power, and how
the Prime Minister is chosen.
Unlike many democratic systems where
citizens directly vote for the national
leader, in the UK people do not vote for
a Prime Minister, not directly at least.
The British Prime Minister as of the time
of recording this episode is Keir Starmer,
and in the 2024 national elections, he
received a grand total of 18,884 votes.
You didn’t mishear that.
18,884.
Now, you might be wondering
how that’s possible.
A country of 70 million people, and
the Prime Minister only received enough
votes to fit a small football stadium.
Well, the British voting
system is different.
The country is split into 650 areas,
or constituencies as they are called.
These are divided broadly by the number of
people in each area, so Greater London has
75, but the whole of Scotland only has 57.
And at an election, British
citizens registered in that
constituency vote for candidates
in that constituency, in that area.
Typically each political party will
propose one candidate per constituency,
and the candidate who receives the
most votes is elected the Member of
Parliament for that constituency.
So going back to Keir Starmer for a
moment, he is the Labour MP for an area
of London called Holborn and St Pancras.
That constituency only has around 75,000
registered voters, and he received
just shy of 19,000 votes in the last
election; he didn’t even receive a
majority of votes in his own constituency.
So, you have 650 constituencies, each
of which votes for its MP, and most
MPs are part of a political party.
A party has a leader, and the
leader of the party with the most
MPs will become Prime Minister.
So in practice, yes, Keir Starmer might
have only got fewer than 19,000 votes
directly, but everyone voting for a Labour
MP in their constituency was indirectly
voting for him as Prime Minister,
because he was the Labour leader.
The consequence of this system,
the so-called “first past the post”
system, is that it disproportionately
rewards larger parties.
For example, if, theoretically, one
large party wins 51% of the votes in
every constituency, and the remaining
49% of the votes are split between
two smaller parties, that large party
would receive 100% of the MPs, and
the smaller parties would receive 0%.
And this advantage shows
up in a few different ways.
First, millions of votes can end
up making no difference at all.
A party whose support is spread thinly
across the whole country might get
a respectable share of the national
vote but still fail to win a single
parliamentary seat, simply because it
never comes first in any constituency.
Second, the opposite can also be true:
a party with support concentrated
in one region can win a large
number of seats with a relatively
small share of the national vote.
This is why regional parties—like the
Scottish National Party—often do well
under the First Past the Post system.
Third, the system means that the national
vote share and the number of MPs a party
wins can look wildly out of proportion.
A party might win a comfortable majority
in Parliament with well under half
of the popular vote, while another
might win millions of votes and end up
with almost no representation at all.
This actually happened in
the last election, in 2024.
The Labour Party won what was called a
landslide victory, with 63% of the seats,
but only won 34% of the popular vote.
These are all variations of the same
point: First Past the Post rewards parties
that can win lots of constituencies,
not necessarily lots of votes.
Supporters say this delivers clear
winners and stable governments; in
the UK coalitions are quite rare,
with only 19 of the past 100 years
having a coalition in government.
Critics, on the other hand, say it’s
unfair and distorts the democratic will.
And this debate comes up
at almost every election.
Whatever your opinion, First Past
the Post is one of the defining
features of British politics, and it
shapes almost everything about how
politicians campaign, governments are
formed and how power changes hands.
So, there is a national election–or
general election–which typically
happens every five years.
British citizens vote for their regional
MP, the results come in, and typically
one political party will win a majority,
more than 325, of the electoral seats.
Its leader will become Prime Minister,
and he or she will appoint ministers
to various positions of power.
Of course, this is politics, so they’ll
choose this strategically based on
alliances, rewarding supporters, punishing
critics, and perhaps putting rivals
in token positions of responsibility
from where they cannot mount an attack.
But this certainly isn’t
unique to British politics.
Now, let’s talk about what
these MPs actually do.
Every MP, whether that is the
Prime Minister, a government MP,
or a member of a minor party, they
are the elected representative of
the people in their constituency.
This means that they have a duty to
represent the interests and concerns
of the people living in their
area; they aren’t just representing
their party or the country.
How this works in practice is that
anyone can write to their MP about
a concern they have, whether that’s
something as weighty as government
foreign policy or simply that the
local post office is closing down.
And it’s the MP’s job to take these
concerns to parliament, through some
sort of filtering system, of course.
And if you’ve seen clips of people
standing up in an old-looking room with
wooden benches with green fabric, shouting
at each other, this is what’s happening.
The highlight of this is every
Wednesday, at 12pm: Prime
Minister’s Questions, or PMQs.
This is when MPs have the chance to
ask the Prime Minister questions,
questions that are typically
intended to catch them out.
It’s here that you have the most
heated debate, and this is all
broadcast live, for anyone to see.
It’s a fundamental part of the
British political system, requiring
the Prime Minister to respond to
unscripted questions about his
or her government’s performance
every week that Parliament is open.
It certainly keeps the
government on its toes.
And this isn’t the only thing.
The Prime Minister is only Prime Minister
because he or she has the support of
their party, the moment they lose that
support is the moment they lose their job.
This can happen in a couple of ways.
Most commonly, it comes
from inside their own party.
Political parties in the UK can remove
their leader if enough of their MPs
decide they no longer support them.
Different parties have different
internal rules, but in practice it
usually begins with a group of unhappy
MPs writing to party authorities
to demand a leadership contest.
If the leader loses that contest, they
step down as party leader, and because
the Prime Minister must be the leader of
the governing party, they automatically
stop being Prime Minister as well.
Alternatively, a Prime Minister can lose
support in the House of Commons itself.
The opposition can call what is known
as a vote of no confidence, a formal
test of whether the government still
has the backing of a majority of MPs.
If the government loses such a vote,
convention says the Prime Minister must
either resign or call a general election.
Both of these mechanisms — internal
revolts within the governing party, or
formal votes in Parliament — mean that a
Prime Minister is never entirely secure.
They must constantly maintain the
confidence of their colleagues
and the support of the Commons.
And it’s this reliance on maintaining
confidence that makes British politics
so lively, for want of a better word.
Governments that appear strong
can unravel quickly, and Prime
Ministers can go from untouchable
to unemployed in a matter of days.
Or in the case of Liz Truss,
who was Prime Minister back in
2022, she lasted a mere 44 days.
Now, let’s move on and talk
about the main political parties.
For much of the past 100 years,
British politics has been dominated
by two political parties: The Labour
Party, which is currently in power,
and the Conservative Party, which
was in power for the last decade.
No other party has had a majority
since before the First World War.
The Labour Party is traditionally
centre-left, and is associated
with workers’ rights, social
equality, and public services.
The Conservative party is
centre-right, and is associated
with free markets, limited
government, and social conservatism.
For much of the 20th century,
British politics was a back-and-forth
contest between these two giants.
One would win an election and govern
for a decade; then the other would
return and reverse many of the
policies, and depending on the mood
at the time, both parties might shift
slightly to the left or to the right.
This created a political rhythm:
Left, right, left, right.
And this comes from the first past
the post voting system that we
talked about a few minutes ago.
But it looks very possible
that things might change.
The most popular political party
according to current polls is not
Labour or Conservatives, or even the
historically small-but-sometimes-important
Liberal Democrats; it’s a
relatively new party called Reform.
Now, Reform was originally called the
Brexit Party, a party which will, to
quote its website directly, “stand up
for British culture, identity and values.
Freeze immigration and stop the boats.
Restore law and order.
Repair our broken public services.
Cut taxes to make work pay.
End government waste.
Slash energy bills.
Unlock real economic growth.”
Its critics paint it as a far-right
populist party, but its supporters
say it is the only party capable of
fixing a broken political system.
It certainly is increasingly popular,
and the most recent opinion poll has
it far ahead, with 27% vote share, to
Labour’s 19% and The Conservatives 18%.
The next general election is not
scheduled to be held until 2029, so
there is a long time for those numbers
to move, and they most likely will have
shifted by the time you listen to this.
But if it continues this way, it may
just be the first time in a century
that the UK will not have a Labour
or Conservative Prime Minister.
Now, there is one final thing to mention,
and that is an additional complication to
do with the unusual structure of the UK.
And this is something called devolution.
The United Kingdom is formed of
four countries: England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
In response to growing calls for
greater autonomy, especially in
Scotland, starting in the late
1990s the UK started to transfer
certain powers away from the central
government to regional parliaments.
This means that there are
regional parliaments in Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland.
Each of these have slightly different
powers to change laws, but they
typically can pass laws on issues
that affect that region, such as
on education and health systems.
Interestingly enough, England, which
is by far the largest part of the UK,
has no devolved parliament of its own.
Its laws are made by Westminster.
This creates a tension called
the “West Lothian Question”.
Scottish MPs can vote on laws
that only affect England, such
as English schools or hospitals.
But English MPs cannot vote on similar
laws for Scotland, because Scotland
controls those matters itself.
It's a small but important question.
So, to wrap things up, the British
political system is not perfect.
It's a patchwork of rituals,
culture, and history.
But at its core there are some important
principles: nobody is above the law,
Members of Parliament exist to serve
the people, and there are checks and
balances to ensure that anyone not
doing a good job is swiftly sacked.
It is imperfect, but to quote the
two-time British Prime Minister, Winston
Churchill, “Many forms of Government
have been tried, and will be tried
in this world of sin and woe. No one
pretends that democracy is perfect or
all-wise. Indeed it has been said that
democracy is the worst form of Government
except for all those other forms that
have been tried from time to time.”
OK, then, that is it for today's episode
on the weird and wacky, and sometimes
wonderful, world of British politics.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
What was surprising to you
about British politics?
If you live in the UK, what do you
think will happen in the next election?
And how does the political system in
the UK differ from that in your country?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
Let me know in the comments below,
if you're listening to this somewhere
where you can comment, and for the
members among you, you can head right
into our community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.